SDN-4004: Admin Network Policy in OVN-K (#1414)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/network/admin-network-policy.md

---
title: admin-network-policy
authors:
  - tssurya
reviewers:
  - trozet, OpenShift Networking
  - astoycos, Office of the CTO
  - npinaeva, OpenShift Networking
approvers:
  - trozet, OpenShift Networking
api-approvers:
  - None
creation-date: 2023-05-31
last-updated: 2023-06-1
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDN-2931
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDN-2932
see-also:
  - "https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-network/2091-admin-network-policy"
replaces:
  - None
superseded-by:
  - None
---

# Add Support for Admin Network Policy in OVN-Kubernetes

## Summary

> This enhancement outlines the design details to implement `Admin Network Policy` and
> `Baseline Admin Network Policy` APIs in OVN-Kubernetes CNI plugin. These are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enhancement outlines the design details to implement two new resources which are part of the upstream [NetworkPolicy API](https://network-policy-api.sigs.k8s.io/) effort, `AdminNetworkPolicy` and
`BaselineAdminNetworkPolicy` in OVN-Kubernetes CNI plugin. These are
```

Author: done!

[new APIs that are currently in v1alpha1 version](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/tree/master/apis/v1alpha1)
and maintained by upstream Kubernetes `sig-network-policy-api` working group.

## Motivation

> Today, OVN-Kubernetes supports Kubernetes Network Policy API that is being used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, OVN-Kubernetes supports the core V1 NetworkPolicy resource which is being used
```

Author: done.

> by all personas (administrators, operators, developers, application owners, tenant admins) for enforcing network traffic regulations on their cluster worloads.

Author: oops, fixed.

deny ACL as soon as the policy is applied to the workload, thus automatically
isolating the workload. Any traffic that needs to be allowed, has to be called
out explicitly. For network administrators, they prefer an allowList and DenyList
that is explicit and an API that is similar to their traditonal firewall rules
that doesn't make any implicit assumptions.

### User Stories

* > "As an OpenShift cluster administrator I want to apply cluster-scoped policies
and guardrails for my entire cluster before namespaces are even created"

* > "As an OpenShift network administrator I want to enforce network traffic controls
that are non-overridable by users in the cluster in order to secure my cluster"

* > "As an OpenShift network administrator I want to enforce optional baseline network
traffic controls that are overridable by users in the cluster if need be"

Check out https://network-policy-api.sigs.k8s.io/user-stories/ where more fine grained
user stories for ANP and BANP are outlined.

### Goals

* Provide support for admins to use Admin Network Policy API in OVN-Kubernetes
* Provide support for admins to use Baseline Admin Network Policy API in OVN-Kubernetes

> * Provide support for admins to define `Pass` action rules in ANP API that will enable

Reviewer 2: Confused that this is not part of the first goal? Is it downstream specific?

Author: oh actually you are right, this is part of first goal and its not downstream specific - just wanted to call out the extra shiny feature here but maybe that makes it more confusing. I will remove the 3rd goal.

  * [`notSameLabels`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/blob/7321d8509d9bf425c9c5b0338db3c0fb2816b4c5/apis/v1alpha1/shared_types.go#L143)
* ANP & BANP Policy logging (will be iterated upon in the future revisions)
* ANP & BANP Scale testing (will be iterated upon in the future revisions)
* Supporting ANP&BANP on Secondary Networks. Today Multi-Network Policies are
maintained by https://github.com/openshift/multus-networkpolicy and any future
support for cluster-scoped will have to come from those working groups to maintain parity.

The implementation will be an iterative process based on customer feedback and performance evaluation. Goal is to get a tech preview version of the current v1alpha1 API in OCP 4.14 which will be improved upon.

## Proposal

A new level-driven controller will be added in OVN-Kubernetes which will
watch for the `AdminNetworkPolicy`, `BaselineAdminNetworkPolicy`, `Namespaces`
and `Pods` objects and create the:

* port groups for the subject pods selected in the policies - we will try to

> investigate if shared port groups can be used here whereever possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
investigate if shared port groups can be used here wherever possible
```

* address-sets for the peers defined in the policies - we will try and reuse
the address sets that are created for namespaces today and share them wherever possible
* acls for the ingress and egress policy rules that will connect these port-groups
and address-sets together into meaningful allow, deny or pass rules

for:

* ANP add/update/delete
* BANP add/update/delete
* pod add/update/delete (if it matches the policies; NOTE: updates are handled
only if pod labels, podIPs or podState (completed) changed)
* namespace add/update/delete (if it matches the policies; NOTE: updates are
handled only for label changes)

This controller will live in the `go-controller/pkg/ovn/controller` path
of OVNKubernetes repo under its own package `admin_network_policy`. Since these

> are new APIs, we cannot reuse the [caches](https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn-kubernetes/blob/68295ec197b8eadd61ff872e293676fa1a68179d/go-controller/pkg/ovn/base_network_controller_policy.go#L123) that are present in network policy code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are new APIs, we cannot reuse the [caches](https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn-kubernetes/blob/master/go-controller/pkg/ovn/base_network_controller_policy.go#L123) that are present in network policy code.
```

Reviewer: Wait is this the right link?

Author: yeah I marked the perma link to the code line, if I use `master` it will change when the code moves/changes
https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn-kubernetes/blob/68295ec197b8eadd61ff872e293676fa1a68179d/go-controller/pkg/ovn/base_network_controller_policy.go#L123
should work

want to add more things into the overloaded `oc` controller.

This controller hopes to be the first step towards breaking out network policy
construct management into its own set of standard controllers for the newer APIs.
Note that Network Policy V1 API is core and in-tree and potentially will never be
deprecated. Thus the existing code for network policy can be maintained as is in
the `oc` controller if need be. But new features are no longer added to that API.
So whenever Developer Network Policies come into play which is the future v2 of
network policy v1, we should be able to leverage the design of this new controller
and implement that easily. 

### Hierarchical ACLs and Pass Action

In order to implement the smooth co-existence of ANPs, NPs and BANPs in a cluster,
and ensure we provide clear precedence in the order of [ANP > NP > BANP](https://deploy-preview-54--kubernetes-sigs-network-policy-api.netlify.app/)
we will use a new RFE from OVN called [Hierarchical ACLs](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2134138).

This will let us define ACLs in stages or tiers. Currently we can support upto

> 4 tiers - 0, 1, 2 and 3. We will allot tier1 to ANP ACLs, tier2 to NP ACLs and

Reviewer: Why not utilize tiers 0, 1, 2 instead instead?  Is there some other ACL user that will take advantage of tier 0 or is it just to error on the side of caution?

Author: yeah so OVN team gave us 4 tiers to start with, I want to leave the tier0 as placeholder for some "SuperAdmin" use cases if any :) 5 years from now. If we want more tiers like 4/5/6/7 etc we can ask OVN team to bump the number from 4 to 8, but if we use tier0 now and need it for something in future then we'd need to move stuff over.

Also 0 is the default value for this column during upgrades, so easier to allot the other numbers as separate from the default value.

name                : a11410890234882820008
```
```text
_uuid               : d4a487dd-3ac0-44d7-b07d-8d6eb0729567
action              : pass
direction           : from-lport
external_ids        : {direction=ANPEgress, "k8s.ovn.org/id"="network-policy-controller:AdminNetworkPolicy:priority-50-example:ANPEgress:25000", "k8s.ovn.org/name"=priority-50-example, "k8s.ovn.org/owner-controller"=network-policy-controller, "k8s.ovn.org/owner-type"=AdminNetworkPolicy, priority="25000"}
label               : 0
log                 : false
match               : "((ip4.dst == $a11410890234882820008)) && (inport == @a16480371363466183296)"
meter               : acl-logging
name                : priority-50-example_ANPEgress_25000
options             : {apply-after-lb="true"}
priority            : 25000
severity            : debug
tier                : 1
```

#### Variation [optional]

N/A

### API Extensions

None

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

Covered in the above sections

### Risks and Mitigations

N/A

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

> Aligning existing network policy V1 code with this new controller -

Reviewer: Was this not decided already?  Is seems like level driven is in-fact the "right" way to do things as it pertains to Kubernetes controllers.

Author: yes I will remove this block actually. It is not relevant anymore.

we need to decide if we want to stick to existing event drivenness
and add things into `oc` or if we want to go ahead with the new
controller

> ### Test Plan

Reviewer: Are there any Ovn-Kubernetes SPECIFIC downstream tests we'll need to add here?

I'm sure Unit testing the controller code will be important

Author: yeah unit testing is covered as point 3 and some other tests like setting status per zone etc will be covered in OVNK repo as part of unit tests.
As of now in first iteration I am not adding any new e2e's - only lots of unit tests will come in that are downstream specific, but will iterate in future for missing coverage it any.

* e2e conformance tests will be added for ANP & BANP into upstream `network-policy-api` repo
* Those e2e's will be brought down into OVN-Kubernetes CI and run as part of the presubmit jobs
* unit testing will be added for both ANP & BANP, pod label and namespace label changes

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

> Tech Preview: 4.14

Reviewer: Sorry I keep getting confused here :) Why not start with "dev preview" ? 

Originally I thought for "tech preview" the API needed to make it to `beta` but now that's changed? 

It might be worth adding a quick blurb here noting why we chose to do either tech OR dev preview first?

Author: @abhat told me there is no such thing as "DevPreview" in OCP. It's either "TechPreview" or GA. Having said that, I am ok to keep this feature on TechPreview till 4.16. So TechPreview for 2 releases and then GA that should give us enough time to graduate the API.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

> GA: 4.15 OR 4.16 ? (whenever we feel comfortable we can GA?)

Reviewer: I wouldn't put a timeline here.... Let's make sure we're REALLY comfortable with the object and it's stability before pushing to GA

Author: ack I am going to leave it as 4.16 which is one year from now :) so that it is tracked in our goals instead of giving it a timeless/prioritiless goal.
